---
title: "SQL Injection - Hypersonic SQL"
alertid: 40020
alerttype: "Active Scan Rule"
alertcount: 1
status: beta
type: alert
date: 2020-08-14 11:48:43.628Z
lastmod: 2020-08-14 11:48:43.628Z
---
## Name: SQL Injection - Hypersonic SQL

### Type: Active Scan Rule

### Risk: High

### Description

SQL injection may be possible

### Solution

Do not trust client side input, even if there is client side validation in place. 
In general, type check all data on the server side.
If the application uses JDBC, use PreparedStatement or CallableStatement, with parameters passed by '?'
If the application uses ASP, use ADO Command Objects with strong type checking and parameterized queries.
If database Stored Procedures can be used, use them.
Do *not* concatenate strings into queries in the stored procedure, or use 'exec', 'exec immediate', or equivalent functionality!
Do not create dynamic SQL queries using simple string concatenation.
Escape all data received from the client.
Apply a 'whitelist' of allowed characters, or a 'blacklist' of disallowed characters in user input.
Apply the privilege of least privilege by using the least privileged database user possible.
In particular, avoid using the 'sa' or 'db-owner' database users. This does not eliminate SQL injection, but minimizes its impact.
Grant the minimum database access that is necessary for the application.

### References

* https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/SQL_Injection_Prevention_Cheat_Sheet.html

### CWE: [89](https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/89.html)

### WASC:  19

### Code

 * [org/zaproxy/zap/extension/ascanrulesBeta/SqlInjectionHypersonicScanRule.java](https://github.com/zaproxy/zap-extensions/blob/master/addOns/ascanrulesBeta/src/main/java/org/zaproxy/zap/extension/ascanrulesBeta/SqlInjectionHypersonicScanRule.java)

###### Last updated: 2020-08-14 11:48:43.628Z
