---
title: "Example Active Scanner: Denial of Service"
alertid: 60100
alerttype: "Active Scan Rule"
status: alpha
type: alert
date: 2020-04-30 09:48:11.442Z
lastmod: 2020-04-30 09:48:11.442Z
---
### Type: Active Scan

### Risk: High

### Description

Denial of Service (DoS) is an attack technique with the intent of preventing a web site from serving normal user activity. DoS attacks, which are easily normally applied to the network layer, are also possible at the application layer. These malicious attacks can succeed by starving a system of critical resources, vulnerability exploit, or abuse of functionality.

Many times DoS attacks will attempt to consume all of a web site's available system resources such as: CPU, memory, disk space etc. When any one of these critical resources reach full utilization, the web site will normally be inaccessible.

As today's web application environments include a web server, database server and an authentication server, DoS at the application layer may target each of these independent components. Unlike DoS at the network layer, where a large number of connection attempts are required, DoS at the application layer is a much simpler task to perform.

### Solution

Phase: Architecture and Design

Design throttling mechanisms into the system architecture. The best protection is to limit the amount of resources that an unauthorized user can cause to be expended. A strong authentication and access control model will help prevent such attacks from occurring in the first place. The login application should be protected against DoS attacks as much as possible. Limiting the database access, perhaps by caching result sets, can help minimize the resources expended. To further limit the potential for a DoS attack, consider tracking the rate of requests received from users and blocking requests that exceed a defined rate threshold.

Mitigation of resource exhaustion attacks requires that the target system either:
      recognizes the attack and denies that user further access for a given amount of time, or
      uniformly throttles all requests in order to make it more difficult to consume resources more quickly than they can again be freed. 

The first of these solutions is an issue in itself though, since it may allow attackers to prevent the use of the system by a particular valid user. If the attacker impersonates the valid user, he may be able to prevent the user from accessing the server in question.

The second solution is simply difficult to effectively institute -- and even when properly done, it does not provide a full solution. It simply makes the attack require more resources on the part of the attacker.

Ensure that protocols have specific limits of scale placed on them.

Phase: Implementation
Ensure that all failures in resource allocation place the system into a safe posture.

### References

* http://projects.webappsec.org/Denial-of-Service
* http://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/400.html

### CWE: [0](https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/0.html)

### WASC:  0

### Code

 * [org/zaproxy/zap/extension/ascanrulesAlpha/ExampleSimpleActiveScanner.java](https://github.com/zaproxy/zap-extensions/blob/master/addOns/ascanrulesAlpha/src/main/java/org/zaproxy/zap/extension/ascanrulesAlpha/ExampleSimpleActiveScanner.java)

###### Last updated: 2020-04-30 09:48:11.442Z
